To understand how we visibly age,
it helps to understand
the anatomy of the skin.
Two features many people recognize
are hair follicles and sweat glands.
The outer or superficial layer
of the skin is called the epidermis.
Underneath that, shown here in brown,
is the dermis.
The epidermis contains elastin,
which gives young skin elasticity
and enables it to quickly recover its shape.
The sweat glands,
which contain and release moisture,
are also important for youthful skin,
as is the blood supply.
But a lot of unprotected sun exposure
even when you’re young
can dry out the skin.
Surface cracks allow
even more moisture to escape.
And damaged skin produces less elastin,
which contributes to wrinkle formation.
Using the right kind of sun block or sunscreen
can help to prevent further damage.
The sun gives off several kinds of rays,
including UVA and UVB.
Both can damage skin.
The skin on the left is protected from both,
but the skin on the right
is not protected against UVAs,
which continue to damage tissues.
This prompts cells in the epidermis
to release melanin,
which darkens the skin.
A lot of exposure results in sunburn,
which causes the release of
more melanin to protect the skin
and leads to sun spots and freckles.
Using the wrong kinds of soaps
can also age skin
by stripping away the thin protective
coating called the acid mantle.
Cigarette smoke promotes skin cracks and wrinkles
because it reduces levels of nitric oxide,
a cellular gas that helps keep skin flexible
Many women use an exfoliating agent
to debride or scrape off dead skin cells.
Some agents become smaller
or dissolve as they’re used,
which can help prevent overuse or damage
while still leaving young,
healthy material.
Hydration is also important;
ideally, the solution will penetrate
the pores and keep them small
while also plumping up the epidermis.